2025-03-26 UKSTUG talk


title

     Livecoding Language Models: AI Context in Live Environments

abstract

     Using a tool creates context for complimentary tools. For
example, selecting an object in a Smalltalk inspector creates useful
context for browsing the class of that object. This is a potent idea
in an integrated development environment, where multiple tools operate
on related information. The extensive context in a live environment
enables powerful collaboration with contemporary AI language models.

     Tools built from that collaboration could greatly augment human
capability. I’ll show some foundations for them, and suggest ways of
easing their construction through the systematic description of
existing tool functionality. For a preview, please see my blog at
thiscontext.com.

bio

     Craig Latta is a research computer scientist in Berkeley and
Amsterdam, with interests including livecoding, music performance, and
interactive visualization. The discovery of a mysteriously-placed Blue
Book at university led to stints at several exploratory labs, and a
pursuit of improvisation wherever code is found. His current work
focuses on polyglot computing with WebAssembly, the novel compiler
framework Epigram, and human augmentation through AI.

***

brainstorming:

- The talk title "Livecoding Language Models" has a double meaning:
  both the human and the model are livecoding (and sometimes
  livecoding each other).

- Might be fun to have an opening slide which has two tentative titles
  crossed out before the actual title: "Large Liability Models" and
  "Large Language Models".

- Is there going to be a split-screen with some non-Smalltalk thing,
  like last time? The web browser devtools?

- It might be fun to have prompts which can answer objects instead of
  prose, with or without local Smalltalk tool functions.

- Go breadth-first in topic coverage, to give the audience the most to
  discuss as soon as possible.

***

(scroll for slide notes)






































slides:

- "This work and presentation..."

  Introduce myself. Read the latest at my blog... thiscontext.com
  (show that website).

- "Using a tool..."

  Introduce the topic of "intelligence augmentation", mention its
  Wikipedia page and the inspiration you took from Douglas
  Engelbart. Show the website for Engelbart's 1962 SRI report.

- "workspace example..."

  With these IDE demos, I want to show a minimal example leading to a
  pervasive technique. Let's expand on the meaning of "do it", which
  traditionally works anywhere you can enter text. In addition to
  evaluating code, we'll be evaluating English. In both cases, there
  can be useful side effects, including provoking new ideas in
  ourselves.

  Show interaction with an LLM from a Smalltalk workspace, and show
  how you use exception handling to invoke the LLM. Show how the
  exception's context leads to context for the LLM (in particular,
  from the workspace using the selected expression as an LLM prompt).

  To show framework methods, halt in (OpenAIRESTClient class)>>forTool:

  Framework methods in order of use:

  Compiler>>evaluateCue:ifFail:
  StringHolder>>handleUndeclaredVariableException: (sent by Compiler>>evaluateCue:ifFail:)
  StringHolder>>tool, sent by StringHolder>>handleUndeclaredVariableException:
  Object>>systemPrompt and overrides; an important ancestor context is (OpenAIRESTClient class)>>forTool:
  Object>>tools and overrides, sent by OpenAIRESTClient>>nextCompletion

- "inspector example..."

  Show a similar example with different context, from an inspector. In
  the workspace example, from the developer's point of view, a prompt
  is context-free. The LLM context is all behind the scenes; it's just
  the workspace's text selection. With an inspector, there is context
  from having selected a field of the inspected object, and even from
  just having opened the inspector. We can use that context to provide
  different system prompts and "tool functions" for the LLM.

  Explain tool functions from the OpenAI API. Mention that AI APIs
  seem to be converging, and that I expect a similar convergence
  around Anthropic's Model Context Protocol (MCP). MCP enables
  separation between the system implementing tool functions and the
  system implementing an AI application. Show the MCP announcement
  webpage.

- "debugger example..."

  Show a final example using what is just a more complex inspector: a
  Smalltalk debugger. Mention the potential for coding assistance,
  and, more importantly, debugging assistance.

  My first question when encountering a programming language is
  usually "How do I debug?". My first question about coding assistants
  is usually "How do you help me debug?" The current crop of coding
  assistants are often good at generating working code, but weak at
  dealing with problems in that code, and untrained in fixing a
  running system without stopping it.

  "Vibecoding" might come to mean something more substantial, if good
  coding assistants become good debugging assistants as well. It may
  establish itself alongside the other exploratory and collaborative
  coding techniques we use with Smalltalk. I think there's an
  interesting resonance between "vibecoding" and "livecoding". Show
  the Wikipedia vibecoding page.

  AI vs. IA... AI could be an enabler of human augmentation as Douglas
  Engelbart envisioned it, through collaborative tools. It's more
  effective for this when thoughfully integrated into comfortable
  human interfaces, beyond the simple call-and-response format of the
  initial chatbots.

  Other groups are pursuing new UI ideas for AI. For example, The
  Browser Company is making a web browser (Dia) that uses familiar UI
  elements, like the ubiquitous text insertion cursor, as entrances
  into AI collaboration. Show the Dia website.

  The Caffeine and SqueakJS sites are there in case someone wants to
  see them.

